torch v0.10.0 blog post (#210)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2023-04-14-torch-0-10/torch-0-10.Rmd

---
title: "torch 0.10.0"
description: >
  torch v0.10.0 is now on CRAN. This version upgraded the underlying LibTorch to 1.13.1,
  added support for Automatic Mixed Precision. As an experimental feature we now
  also support pre-built binaries, so you can install torch without having to deal
  with the CUDA installation.
author:
  - name: Daniel Falbel
    affiliation: Posit
    affiliation_url: https://www.posit.co/
slug: torch-0-9-0

> date: 2023-04-21

Author: I'll wait until torch is on CRAN and then change the date. I think it makes sense to merge as soon it's on CRAN.

categories:
  - Torch
  - Packages/Releases
  - R
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
preview: images/torch.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE, fig.width = 6, fig.height = 6)
```

> torch v0.10.0 is now on CRAN. This version upgraded the underlying LibTorch to 1.13.1,

Reviewer: Hm, this will duplicate the abstract, and thus appear twice on the web page ... We'd need to completely remove the paragraph, and have some other short intro instead. How about:

Today, we're happy to announce the first double-digit release of torch. It brings significant enhancements in both functionality and usability.

(((I'm aware it's double-digit in the minor version ... you could add a footnote, saying "in the minor version, but still :-)" ... or something like that)))

Author: Thanks! I didn't notice that this appears also in the top page. I have updated the intro.

added support for Automatic Mixed Precision. As an experimental feature we now
also support pre-built binaries, so you can install torch without having to deal
with the CUDA installation. The full changelog can be found [here](https://torch.mlverse.org/docs/news/index.html#torch-010).

## Automatic Mixed Precision

> Automatic Mixed Precision (AMP) is a technique that enables faster training of deep learning models while maintaining model accuracy by using a combination of single-precision (FP32) and half-precision (FP16) floating-point formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatic Mixed Precision (AMP) is a technique that enables faster training of deep learning models, while maintaining model accuracy by using a combination of single-precision (FP32) and half-precision (FP16) floating-point formats.
```

> In order to use automatic mixed precision with torch you will need to use the `with_autocast`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to use automatic mixed precision with torch, you will need to use the `with_autocast`
```

context switcher to allow torch to use different implementations of operations that can run
with half-precision. In general it's also recommended to scale the loss function in order to

> preserve small gradients as they get closer to zero in half-precision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
preserve small gradients, as they get closer to zero in half-precision.
```

Here's a minimal example, ommiting the data generation process. You can find more information in the [amp article](https://torch.mlverse.org/docs/articles/amp.html).

```
...
loss_fn <- nn_mse_loss()$cuda()
net <- make_model(in_size, out_size, num_layers)
opt <- optim_sgd(net$parameters, lr=0.1)
scaler <- cuda_amp_grad_scaler()

for (epoch in seq_len(epochs)) {
  for (i in seq_along(data)) {
    with_autocast(device_type = "cuda", {
      output <- net(data[[i]])
      loss <- loss_fn(output, targets[[i]])  
    })
    
    scaler$scale(loss)$backward()
    scaler$step(opt)
    scaler$update()
    opt$zero_grad()
  }
}
```

In this example, using mixed precision led to a speedup of around 40%. This speedup is

> increased if you are just running inference, ie, don't need to scale the loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even bigger if you are just running inference, i.e., don't need to scale the loss.
```

## Pre-built binaries

> Pre built binaries makes installing torch much easier and faster, specially if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With pre-built binaries, installing torch gets a lot easier and faster, especially if
```

you are on Linux and using the CUDA enabled builds. The pre-built binaries include
LibLantern and LibTorch, both external dependencies necessary to run torch. Additionally,
if you install the CUDA enabled builds, it also includes the CUDA libraries and 
the cuDNN libraries.

> To install from the pre-built binaries you can use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install  the pre-built binaries, you can use:
```

```r
options(timeout = 600) # increasing timeout is recommended since we will be downloading a 2GB file.
kind <- "cu117" # "cpu", "cu117" are the only currently supported.
version <- "0.10.0"
options(repos = c(
  torch = sprintf("https://storage.googleapis.com/torch-lantern-builds/packages/%s/%s/", kind, version),
  CRAN = "https://cloud.r-project.org" # or any other from which you want to install the other R dependencies.
))
install.packages("torch")
```

As a nice example, you can get up and running with a GPU on Google Colaboratory in

> less than 3 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
less than 3 minutes!
```

![Colaboratory running torch](images/colab.png)

## Speedups

> Thanks to an [issue](https://github.com/mlverse/torch/issues/992) opened by @egillax we could find and fix a bug that caused 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to an [issue](https://github.com/mlverse/torch/issues/992) opened by @egillax, we could find and fix a bug that caused 
```

> torch functions returning a list of tensors to be very slow. The funciton in case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
torch functions returning a list of tensors to be very slow. The function in case
```

was `torch_split()`.

> This issue has been fixed in v0.10.0 and relying on this behavior should be much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This issue has been fixed in v0.10.0, and relying on this behavior should be much
```

> faster now. Here's a minimal benchmark comparing both v0.9.1 with v0.10.0, by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
faster now. Here's a minimal benchmark comparing both v0.9.1 with v0.10.0:
```

```r
bench::mark(
  torch::torch_split(1:100000, split_size = 10)
)
```

With v0.9.1 we get:

```
# A tibble: 1 × 13
  expression      min  median `itr/sec` mem_alloc `gc/sec` n_itr  n_gc total_time
  <bch:expr> <bch:tm> <bch:t>     <dbl> <bch:byt>    <dbl> <int> <dbl>   <bch:tm>
1 x             322ms   350ms      2.85     397MB     24.3     2    17      701ms
# ℹ 4 more variables: result <list>, memory <list>, time <list>, gc <list>
```

while with v0.10.0:

```
# A tibble: 1 × 13
  expression      min  median `itr/sec` mem_alloc `gc/sec` n_itr  n_gc total_time
  <bch:expr> <bch:tm> <bch:t>     <dbl> <bch:byt>    <dbl> <int> <dbl>   <bch:tm>
1 x              12ms  12.8ms      65.7     120MB     8.96    22     3      335ms
# ℹ 4 more variables: result <list>, memory <list>, time <list>, gc <list>
```

## Build system refactoring

The torch R package depends on LibLantern, a C interface to LibTorch. Lantern is part of

> the torch repository but until v0.9.1 one would need to build LibLantern as in a separate 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the torch repository, but until v0.9.1 one would need to build LibLantern in a separate 
```

step before building the R package itself.

> This approach had many downsides, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach had several downsides, including:
```

> - Installing the package from GitHub was not reliable and reproducible as you would depend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Installing the package from GitHub was not reliable/reproducible, as you would depend
```

on a transient pre-built binary.
- Common `devtools` workflows like `devtools::load_all()` wouldn't work, if the user didn't build
Lantern before, which makes it harder to contribute to torch.

> From now on, building LibLantern is part of the R package building workflow and can be enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From now on, building LibLantern is part of the R package-building workflow, and can be enabled
```

> by setting the `BUILD_LANTERN=1` environment variable. It's not enabled by default because

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by setting the `BUILD_LANTERN=1` environment variable. It's not enabled by default, because
```

building Lantern requires `cmake` and other tools (specially if building the with GPU support), 
and using the pre-built binaries is preferable in those cases. With this environment variable set, 
users can run `devtools::load_all()` to locally build and test torch. 

This flag can also be used when installing torch dev versions from GitHub. If it's set to `1`,
Lantern will be built from source instead of installing the pre-built binaries, which should lead
to better reproducibility with development versions.

> Also, as part of this changes, we have improved the torch automatic installation process. Which now has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, as part of these changes, we have improved the torch automatic installation process. It now has
```

improved error messages to help debugging issues related to the installation. It's also easier to customize
using environment variables, see `help(install_torch)` for more information.

## Final remarks

Thank you to all contributors to the torch ecosystem. This work would not be possible without

> all the helpful issues opened, PR's you created and your hard work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all the helpful issues opened, PRs you created and your hard work.
```

> If you are new to torch and want to learn more, we highly recommend the [recently announced](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2023-04-05-deep-learning-scientific-computing-r-torch/) book 'Deep Learning and Scientific Computing with R `torch`'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are new to torch and want to learn more, we highly recommend the [recently announced](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2023-04-05-deep-learning-scientific-computing-r-torch/) book 'Deep Learning and Scientific Computing with R `torch`'.
```
